Availability and requirements:

Project name: CBS-miRSeq: a robust comprehensive bioinformatics pipeline for microRNA expression profiling by next generation sequencing.
Project home page: http://www.labmedinfo.org/resources/software/CBS-miRSeq
Operating system(s): Linux/Unix.
Programming language: Bash, Perl and R.
Other requirements: Fastx (v0.0.14), FastQC (v0.10.1), SOLiD_preprocess_filter_v2.pl, cutadapt (v1.6), Bowtie (≤ v1.0), bfast (v0.6.5a), featureCounts (v1.4.6), samtools (v0.1.18), bedtools (v2.23.0), miRspring (v1.2), miRDeep2 (v2.0.05), RNAhybrid (v2.1.1), miRanda (v3.3a), bioconductor packages (> v3).
License: GNU GPLv3. 
Any restriction to use by non-academics: None.
*Correspondence:
Email: bioinforupesh2009.au@gmail.com; rupesh.kesharwani@jax.org

Current Affiliation
The Jackson Laborstory of Genomic Medicine
10 discovery Dr.
Farmington, CT 06032

Previous Affiliation
Unit of Immunology and Functional Genomics,
Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS, Milan, 
Italy
Tel: (+39) 02 5800 2464; Fax: (+39) 02 5800 2750
Copyright (c) 2019 Kesharwani RK

Overview:
=================================================================

We proposed a fully customized bioinformatics pipeline (Color and Base-Space microRNA-Seq - CBS-miRSeq) for the seamless processing of miRNA-Seq data for both color-space (csfasta) and base-space (fastq) short reads generated by SOLiD and Illumina sequencers, respectively. 
The pipeline is based on shell, perl and R scripts, which accomplish reads pre-processing, quality assessment, filtering, adapter trimming, mapping, identification of miRNA variants (isomiRs), discovery of novel miRNAs, differential analysis, miRNA:mRNA target prediction and summarization.
Fundamentally the workflow helps the researchers to use this pipeline flexibly, and with mobility, for biological datasets spanning from few to thousands of samples, generated through sequencers (such as Illumina HiSeq and LifeTech SOLiD). Results analysis and output of html, pdf, and csv tables simply and efficiently enable the understanding of further examination by researchers. The Pipeline can be run sequentially on a single machine or parallel in a cluster/server/PBS/clouds system.


Installation
=================================================================
No installation is required, however pipeline requires prerequisite third party softwares that need to be installed first. However, The simplest way to install CBS-miRSeq on your machine is to download virtual machine image (https://drive.google.com/file/d/0ByG63sGTZ4JTSEVOSlhOVlE1UGs/view?usp=sharing).

Note: For more detail please refer to the CBS-miRSeq manual (https://drive.google.com/file/d/0ByG63sGTZ4JTd04zRXgyem1Ddmc/view?usp=sharing)

Disclaimer: Its rquested to user that each software/tools used within this pipelines, need to be cited propoerly.

Quick Installation:
=================================================================
1. Run 
$: sudo bash ./CBS-miRSeq-SystemPackagesInstall.v1.0.sh
## Follow the instructions.
Description: This Script will allow user to install system dependencies if missing.
Note1: There is no guarantee that every required dependency will install automatically.
Note2: Please make certain that the system packages are installed before proceeding with the bioinformatics tool installations.
System required necessary packages for Red Hat, Fedora and CentOS (with yum) are:
unzip
gzip
wget
git-all
automake
dos2unix
g2-devel
perl-CPAN
java-1.7.0-openjdk
Development Tools
libbz2-1.0
zlib1g-devel
bzip2-devel
libbz2-ocaml
libbz2-ocaml-devel
libbz2-devel
libpng-devel
ncurses-devel
libncurses5-devel
ncurses
libncursesw5-devel
gcc
gcc-gfortran
gcc-c++
gd-devel
gd-progs
libICE-devel
libXt-devel
make
libpdf
numpy
python-devel
python-bzutils
python-matplotlib
readline-devel
zlib-devel

2. Run
$: bash ./Install.CBS-miRSeq.dependencies.v1.0.sh 
## and follow the instructions.
Note: Before to run this script; Make sure you have successfully installed miRDeep2 (v2.0.0.5) along with their dependencies.
Description: This script aims to install dependencies software and tools required by the CBS-miRSeq pipeline.
Note: There is no guarantee that every required dependency will install automatically.
Bioinformatics tools that required to execute the Pipeline:
Fastx (v0.0.14)
FastQC (v0.10.1)
SOLiD_preprocess_filter_v2.pl 
cutadapt (>=v1.6)
Bowtie (≤ v1.0)
bfast (v0.6.5a)
featureCounts (v1.4.6)
samtools (v0.1.18) 
bedtools (v2.23.0)
miRspring (v1.2)
miRDeep2 (v2.0.05)
RNAhybrid (v2.1.1) 
miRanda (v3.3a)


3. Run
$: Rscript ./CBS-miRSeq.Required.Packages.v1.0.R
Description: This script aims to install R-biocunductor packages required by the CBS-miRSeq pipeline.
Note: There is no guarantee that every required package will install automatically.
R and Bioconductor packages:
RColorBrewer
BiocInstaller
edgeR
DESeq2
EDASeq
gplots
VennDiagram
plotrix
ReportingTools
hwriter
lattice
S4Vectors
clusterProfiler
ReactomePA
GO.db
biomaRt
DOSE
networkD3
igraph
magrittr
stringi
KEGGprofile
pathview
plyr
gridExtra
grid
grDevices
XML
rJava
crayon
HTSFilter
wordcloud

Quickstart: 
=================================================================

Once the system packages, bioinformatics tools and, R are installed, we are ready to run our analysis.

=================================================================

We can execute the pipeline using test data sample (https://drive.google.com/file/d/0ByG63sGTZ4JTUHkxQlJmanV3VW8/view?usp=sharing). 
(Refer To Test directory)

a) Make a folder where you want to download required results and annotation

$  mkdir Results
$: mkdir annotation

b) Go to the CBS-miRSeq directory

$: cd CBS-miRSeq.v1/Utilities

c) Download the required Annotation files using..

$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.Annotations.Retrieval.v1.0.sh 
## Follow the instructions

d) 1. Download the 3' UTR from biomart as instructed in the manual
   2. Once you downloaded then execute the script as follow:
   bash ./CBS-miRSeq.Prepare.UTR.v1.0.sh <Output_dir> <reference_species_3_letter_code> <biomartfasta/mart_export.txt>

#############################
e) Start your data analysis-
############################

Please Open the CBS-miRSeq.v1/Input_Info/Module1_Input.txt, Module2_Input.txt, and Module3_Input.txt FILES TO PROVIDE THE REQUIRED INPUTS.

Then RUN the Modules of the Pipeline:
################################################################
Aims of module 1: Download the reference genome; build the index for mapping, Quality control (QC) of the Reads, Trim the 3' adapter, Mapping and Quantification of the features (miRNAs and Ensembl biotypes).
Note1: No restrictions regarding the reference organism, user may provide any reference genome. However, this module allow researcher to fetch a few model organism's genome such as Human, Mouse, Rat and Zebrafish.
################################################################
$: cd..
$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.module1.sh Input_Info/Module1_Input.txt

---> ## Wait till its done.

**************************************************************
OPTIONAL STEPS:
Note2: In order to save timing to build the index of your reference genome, user may download and build any genome 
(using bowtie-build) before to run any module and locate the path once module1b ask. In this case user will no longer to use module1 or module1a. Just use module1b for the QC, adapter trimming, Mapping, quantification and report summary of the analysis.
##User need to rename the genome conrresponds to CBS-miRSeq.module1b
RENAMING OF THE GENOME: sps.genome_v86.fa
##sps == reference organism in 3 letter code
##v86 is a version release of Ensembl browser. User may fake this if the genome come from different source but make sure header should be like:
>chr1
ACGCTGCTGATG
>chr2
ACGCTGTGTGTCG

#use to build index for base space reads:
bowtie-build sps.genome_v86.fa > sps.genome_v86B.fa

#use to build index for color space reads:
bowtie-build sps.genome_v86.fa > sps.genome_v86B.fa

# if user got pre-build index from different source, then we recommend to rename it before to use.
RENAMING OF INDEX:
## for base space reads
sps.genome_v86B.1.ebwt
sps.genome_v86B.2.ebwt
sps.genome_v86B.3.ebwt
sps.genome_v86B.4.ebwt
# Reconstruct the genome from index
bowtie-build sps.genome_v86B > sps.genome_v86.fa

## for color space reads
sps.genome_v86C.1.ebwt
sps.genome_v86C.2.ebwt
sps.genome_v86C.3.ebwt
sps.genome_v86C.4.ebwt

# Reconstruct the genome from index
bowtie-build sps.genome_v86C > sps.genome_v86.fa

---->> AS SOON AS, GENOME AND INDEX SET, USER CAN RUN the module1b TO PERFROM 
their ANALYSIS.

**************************************************************

################################################################
Aims of module 2: Conducts Diff analysis (DE), Distribution of Ensembl biotype and detection of iso-miRs.
Note: Please make sure that groups (along with their replicates) of the expression matrix are set in right place i.e. Control x Treatment (Treatment vs Control). However, it is really depend on your experiments and analysis you wish to perform. i.e. A vs B or B vs A.
WARNING!! Output directory cannot be different than module1 (one used in the analysis by module 1). So please make sure it is the same.
################################################################

$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.module2.sh Input_Info/Module2_Input.txt

---> ## wait till its finish.

################################################################	
Aims of module 3: Discovery of Novel miRNA candidates, prediction of target gene of DE miRNAs, Gene enrichment, network and pathway analysis of known and novel miRNAs.
WARNING!! Output directory cannot be different than module1 and 2 (one used in the analysis by module 1 and 2). So please make sure it is the same.
################################################################

$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.module3.sh Input_Info/Module3_Input.txt

---> ## Wait till its finish.
---> Congratulations your analyses being performed.

Note: Example output will create a number of output directories and output inside for further analyses and discoveries.

====================================================================

Optionally, you may execute the sub-modules solitary. It is useful when we want to control the output from every analyses step or to start analysis at different steps of the pipeline.

##Follow the instruction by the corresponding module.

$: cd /Scripts/CBS-miRSeq.v1/

##########################################################
Objective1: User wish to download the reference genome or build the bowtie index (In case user has already downloaded) in order to map their short reads.
##########################################################
$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.module1a_v1.0.sh 


##########################################################
Objective2: User to wish to perform Quality Control (QC) of their reads, clip the 3' adapter and mapping the short reads along with expression counts of the map reads.
##########################################################
$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.module1b_v1.0.sh


###################################################################
Objective3: User wish to conduct a Diff Expression analysis between their experimental groups and identification of Ensembl biotype in a sample given.
###################################################################
$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.module2a_v1.0.sh


########################################################
Objective4: User wish to identify iso-miRs in a sample.
########################################################
$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.module2b_v1.0.sh


##########################################################
Objective5: User wish to Predict Novel miRNAs in a sample.
##########################################################$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.module3a_v1.0.sh



##########################################################
Objective6: User wish to predict the Target gene, perform the gene enrichment, network and pathway analysis of their known and novel miRNAs.
##########################################################
$: bash ./CBS-miRSeq.module3b_v1.0.sh


## Please refer the manual for more details and descriptions: CBS-miRSeq.user.manual_v1.pdf

=================================================================
## For any assistance and debugging,
Please contact:
bioinforupesh2009.au@gmail.com; rupesh.kesharwani@jax.org


date: 21/01/2019
		##^^^^Thank you for using CBS-miRSeq pipeline^^##
